https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwUVCV7S97E0jkb9BlomMl0FkbFru6EhCtBTpq_myRJF7lxXxMVxs72bCky-fhIvsuK5AhPDojOaGlHNnrx8f-3wKXHkNPjGhgdtBcgwDJ7N8lfoTjNZDbEW5Frj0jz4M-yX9b-=w1280-h904-v0

3afcf182-e7f9-4ec1-8660-26b3d6660d15

 

HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT WE KNOW? X 25 

Chapter 2 

. । 

1 : I 

vi :hl 

PT' 

How Do We Know •' • ’■. • pl 

■ ■ TA 

What We Know? ■■'cY 

IMAGINE YOU VISIT A GROCERY STORE on a sunny spring day, and 

there, in the produce section, you see a flowering houseplant with beautiful yel­ 

low blooms. On a whim, you put the plant into your cart and bring it home along 

with your groceries. When you get home, where do you put that plant? You prob­ 

ably put it in the window, or some location that receives nice sunlight. But why do 

you do that? You do it because you know the plant needs sunlight to thrive. 

B ut, how do you know thaft 

Perhaps you’ve had other plants that thrived in the sunlight. Or perhaps 

you inadvertently killed a plant by keeping it too far from a window. But what 

if you had never owned a houseplant before? Would you still know thatyou need 

to put the plant in the window? Probably. You likely know that all plants need 

sunlight to survive. You learned about photosynthesis in school, and you re­ 

call that plants undergo a chemical process in which they use sunlight to help 

convert water and carbon dioxide into food. Or maybe you simply recall that 

all plants need sunlight to survive. Thus, if all plants need sunlight to survive, 

and what you have purchased al. the grocery store is indeed a pluni—and not an 

A 

" . PA • A A 

A 

animal (let’s hope)—then you can deduce that this little houseplant needs sun­ 

light and should be placed in the window. 

This example illustrates two very different ways of knowing. One way draws 

' on our observations of die outside world; the other way is based on the theo- 

ries already in our minds. For the first way, you recalled your observations of 

how plants responded in the past and then generalized from those observations 

to conclude that plants need sunlight. In the philosophy of science, we call this 

induction. Your observations and lived experience suggested a pattern to you, 

and you used that pattern to come to a general proposition: plants need 

, < sunlight. 

The other process of knowing is deduction. With deduction, we start with 

a broad theory-like photosynthesis-and then logically deduce a specific claim 

from that theoiy. Photosynthesis is what keeps plants alive. Photosynthesis re­ 

quires sunlight. Therefore, plants need sunlight. This thing I bought at the 

' 1 ” store is a plant. Hence, it needs sunlight. 

■ A 

.. . 

TA 

These issues are at the heart ofwhat is called epistemology, the centuries- 

f old pursuit of the question, How do we know the things we know? For em­ 

piricists, who prioritize observation and experience (induction) over logic and 

reason (deduction), understanding human perception is paramount. If we are 

going to base our knowledge on what we observe in our world, we need to be 

. able to trust our observations. But we know our senses can lead us astray, such 

PiAW as when we see an animal out of the corner of our eye only to realize it’s just 

leaf blowing in the wind or hear someone call our name and say “Hi!” to a 

Stranger who clearly wasn’t talking to us. The trouble is, if we believe that 

iW' A observations of (he world are the pathway to objective knowledge and we ac-

P knowledge ihat our senses arc fallible, then we need some standards to hold 

;y ourselves accountable whenever we’re drawing conclusions from ourobserva- 

f Hons of I he world.

26 X THE PEOPLE UOW DO WE KNOW WH AT WE KNOW? X 27 

.1 

■SV?! 

II 

SI 

a? 

IL. iN 

I I7 Ki! P'S? 

IS 

I 

a 

For a while, philosophers relied on a concept known as verification; that 

is, can you confirm a claim with observations of the world? Can you verify that 

plants need sunlight? If I put my houseplant in the window and it thrives, and 

then I move it to a dark corner and it gets pale and stops flowering, this would 

be verification of my claim that this houseplant needs sunlight. But what ill want 

to conclude that all\iving houseplants need exposure to sunlight? Is this ac­ 

curate? What about indoor lights for plants (known as grow lights) that mimic 

sunlight indoors? The existence of grow lights means that plants do T/orneed 

exposure to the sun to survive. Generalizing from our observations of the world 

can lead us to incorrect conclusions. The eighteenth-century Scottish philo­ 

sopher David Hume called this the problem of induction. We can’t possibly 

know that what we’re observing here and now will be true in other contexts. 

We cannot know if it is going to happen again tomorrow or the next day or 

somewhere else. 

This is the problem of induction. 

But if we do not allow ourselves to generalize from our observations of the 

world around us, what can we even say? I suppose I could conclude that when 

this plant is in this window on this day it seems green and healthy. Congratula­ 

tions. I have developed a useless theory. 

If we can’t generalize to a broader theory after verifying a claim through 

observations, then how will we ever decide whether a broader theory is true? 

According to scientific philosopher Karl Popper, we don’t. He turns the whole 

question upside down and suggests that instead of trying to prove whether 

something is true, we should do our best to see if it’s not wrong. This is the 

concept of falsification.1 

Maybe I buy 100 of those houseplants. I randomly place half of the 

houseplants in various windows around the house and place the other half in 

 

«l®ii ■ ■■<■■ ■ 

'Bill p ■ 

p® 

Bag?:-■ W B'®l® ® 

Lii' 

o 

111® 

lillll 

»t»® SsBI®' 

lilt 

filL 

lllgls 

.WSSs S ! 

iik Hi- 

IBB®® 

aw 

ill li® 

II® 

IB 

®S®S®A 

Ills® 

lili 

■Bl Mil 

■bib® 

ill® 

®4®S®® 

llliis 

foil® 

illli 

the same amount of water. After a few weeks, if the plants in the dark look about 

as healthy as the plants in the windows, I reject my theory about plants need­ 

ing light. If the plants in the dark died and the ones in the windows are thrivi ng, 

then, following Popper, I can say that we have observed evidence consistent 

with the theory that plants need sunlight, but I cannot say that the theory has 

been proved. The falsifiability principle says we never remove ourselves 

from doubt. This is one of the many reasons the life of a scientist is frustrating: 

we are never totally right; we are just varying levels of “not wrong.” 

Seeing What We Want to See 

Now imagine that on the same day you bought that plant, your friend Judy also 

bought a plant. Judy also has the idea to place the plant on a sunny windowsill 

in her home. Judy has witnessed that when she has placed plants on the win­ 

dowsills next to her cats’ favorite spots, the plants have thrived. But Judy doesn’t 

know about photosynthesis or the relationship between sunshine and plant 

health. Instead, Judy has observed that when she has placed plants next to her 

beloved cats, the plants stayed green and healthy. Judy has induced that the cats’ 

breath produces a special cat-specific substance that is key to the health of her 

plants. Her empirical observations have verified to her that this is true. 

You urge Judy to run an experiment in the hopes it will expose her false 

perception that her cats are improving the health of her plants. Judy conducts 

the same experiment that you did, placing 50 plants on the windowsill and 

50 in the dark. After a few weeks, the plants on the windowsills are thriving 

and the ones in the dark are dead. She concludes that the cats’ breath is the 

key to the health of her plants. Judy’s cats spend most of their time sleeping in 

sunny spots near the windows, and so the plants that have been placed in the 

sunshine also happen to be next to her cats. To Judy, the causal factor that is 

28 X THE PEOPLE HOW DO WE KNOWWIIAT WE KNOW? X 29 

IB 

I 

I 

1H siS 

w lit 

Sa®' 

IS® I IIS i ® I EEs: KE: 

|| 

Obviously, Judy’s experiment has a fatal flaw. She introduced what we call 

a confounding variable by tying the presence of a cat to the sunshine. But that 

fatal flaw, and Judy’s conclusion from this experiment, brings me to one of my 

favorite concepts from the philosophy of science: observations are theory laden. 

Gan we ever objectively “see” the world absent our interpretation of it? Phi­ 

losophers like Norwood Russell Hanson argue that all observations are theory 

laden .2 There are no objective perceptions of the world absent our interpretations 

of them. There is no “sensing” something separate from “interpreting what we 

sense.” Judy observes the cats helping her plants. She knows the cats are helping 

her plants. She sees it with her own eyes. It is the essence of her observation. 

If observations are theory laden, shaped by our own theories and ideas 

about the world, then our observations are unlikely to get us to the objective 

truth. The tests we run, the measures we use, the questions we ask-Hanson 

argues that these are all designed with theoretical assumptions behind them. 

Our underlying values and beliefs about the world are inseparable from the 

things we “see.” So, Judy “saw” that her cats’ breath helped her plants grow. 

Take also the example from the early twentieth century, in which social 

scientists in the United States and Britain were inf l uenced by the study of eu­ 

genics. Eugenics sought to “improve” the human species through selective re­ 

production.3 Among British and US social scientists, eugenics provided a 

useful biological defense for racist and anti-Semitic ideologies, including 

Naziism. Eugenics researchers pointed to “empirical evidence” in support of 

the racial superiority of white Anglo-Saxon Protestants. They pointed to the 

fact that immigrants and ethnic minority populations displayed characteristics 

thatwere deemed less desirable than those displayed by whites: higher rates of 

poverty, lower education, and higher rates of imprisonment. Eugenics re­ 

searchers also cited the results of intelligence tests, which purportedly showed 

 

What the eugenics researchers had /zozdone, however, is consider the so­ 

cial, cultural, economic, and political context that contributed to the observed 

differences in socioeconomic status by race. They also failed to see that their 

measures of “intelligence” captured a kind of knowledge that was closely tied 

to socioeconomic status—for example, questions asked respondents the color 

of an emerald or in which city a particular brand of car was made.4 

What eugenics researchers saw as clear empirical evidence of biological, 

or even genetic, differences between the races, contemporary social scientists 

see as artifacts of social, cultural, and political context. Whereas the eugenics 

researchers of the 1920s were operating from the assumption of white racial 

superiority, most social scientists in the 2020s operate from the assumption 

of systemic racial inequities-in schooling, professional opportunities, and 

treatment within the criminal justice system—that contribute to poverty rates, 

i mprisonment, and test performance. This is what we mean when we say that 

all observations are theory laden. The same data sets viewed by these two dif­ 

ferent groups of researchers hold two opposing sets of meaning. The former 

views the observations as evidence that whites are inherently superior to ra­ 

cial and ethnic minorities. The latter views the observations as evidence that 

racial and ethnic minorities have been systematically disadvantaged by politi­ 

cal, economic, and cultural institutions. 

The psychological phenomenon responsible for the “theory-ladenness of 

our observations” is the concept of confirmation bias, the human tendency to 

pay more attention to information that confirms our preexisting theories and 

beliefs.5 Not only do we pay more attention to information that agrees with 

us, but we also look for it. We also interpret the world around us in a manner 

consistent with those beliefs and resulting expectations. As psychologist Ray­ 

mond Nickerson writes, “If one were to attempt to identify a single problem- 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwaj0WctwRa1dlpA9lL0UIUifvRNpOONeJMPEvZG9I1IqakKE4ZuhayFp7j4UGmqcSsyCFAp8tTSBjrG8Ydy2hKTbEjn_jCav7x0hS1xefM3rclPKLtf3loYRAbX8nrzizNZu6q1A=w1280-h912-v0

93fb1d8b-0736-409c-a018-bef146587a5f

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxmuwLyVx00GPml68Zvhr_UeyWvDlut3vesPibehHTxXjpLvSUaFB4eq3W2YSgIK0TukpskSTvNK4Y_3mfZn_9_JmXQQawMH1OowPps2NIVTBbfWUjk67gb8aj-77LO5f31AbHj=w190-h377-v0

5d6baac8-ea9a-4c3c-94c9-6522f1c750e6

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxcBjS9-4bkjzme1kJy_OKK2LjDKIUWZZzDIgtJdX7NhzfzIVEl7Sp6YP8Ysndiacah0DFowKNBNvOL2cgD8f-1WWp5HA-O-UAtjIG6lFOn-D7zC6vEePfveH4OItL6KTEtxdgg2g=w175-h175-v0

b1d9ff37-e4db-4bd2-988f-3cc29ea4db77

 

ii1 

a 

■W. 

la 

i 

4 

If 

eoidirmaiion bias would have to be among the candidates for consideration.”’’ 

The related concept of motivated reasoning captures the notion that our cog­ 

nitive processes are rarely carried out objectively with the goal of learning what 

is empirically true. Rather, we have skin in the game; we are motivated to land 

on a particular answer, often the one that favors us in some way.7 

Popper’s principle of falsifiability is intended in part to help us push back 

against the theory ladenness of observations, against confirmation bias. Scien­ 

tists design tests to try to prove a claim wrong. After they gather data and ana­ 

lyze patterns, they find that their hypothesis is either confirmed in the data or 

not. If it is confirmed, they don’t say their theory is right. They simply say it’s 

not wrong... yet. Over time they revise and expand the theory and derive a new 

testable hypothesis, and the process goes on and on. This is the day-in and day- 

out of scientific inquiry: coming to an understanding of the world through a 

never-endi ng process of elimination. 

While this might make sense for scientists, for the rest of us this practice 

would be ridiculous. For nonscientists, as soon as we realize that we bought a 

live plant, wc also realize that it obviously needs sun. And with that, we’re done. 

()w process of knowing ends here. We derived a claim based on prior knowl-

■. .■ ■ 

5-

I 

edge, and wc “know” it’s true. 

Because, in daily life, our goal in observing the world is not to get closer 

to (ruth. 

What is our goal, then? 

Is our goal to understand what’s happeni ng around us? Or maybe not to 

actually understand it but to “feel” like we understand it? (comprehension 

motivations). 

Maybe ourgoal is to feel like we have control over things that seem chaotic 

ii '' f ' ' ' 

or random (control motivations). Maybe ourgoal is to feel loved, respected, or 

connected to others as we make sense of the world around us (community mo-

■ ■ 

tivations). Importantly, all of these goals (comprehension, control, and com-

. ■ ■ . 

munity) are rational. They are all directly related to survival and to our psycho­ 

logical and sociological well-being. But these goals also lead us to conclude 

things oi' be attracted to things that are not true. 

- Lies We Tell Ourselves 

Theories, Values, Beliefs 

Reinforcement 

■ I have been, and continue to be, wrong about a great many things. 

Ii 

! I Observations 

4W 

Confirmation Bias 

Human Meaning-Making. Our observations are theory laden. 

ofc 

. -W -

1 

■-

feW ■ ' 

:■ i-K ■ ■ 

For years living in Philadelphia, I was convinced that there were two dif­ 

ferent mail systems: one (still operative) that used the big blue boxes bolted 

down on street corners, and a second, older mail system (now defunct) that used 

big green mailboxes, also bolted to street corners. I observed that the green 

mailboxes had no slot for depositing a letter, and I decided that the slots had 

been welded shut. This observation, combined with my prior knowledge and 

beliefs about the government being slow to act, led me to conclude that the gov­ 

ernment had simply failed to remove the old mail system after introducing the 

newer, blue mailbox system.

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyW48k-aLwdQVIChyVv0TZQX6Gd2gPe-dkKoeaRtZEqMXJcJlPObOZO-fv5RUMinJGRhd0oP562omcxQOxHPkGd_8wpa5hPBt7MnOT6-Gl1BcIBuEaHNXvO2RbK8Vgg4Y-iWegFZA=w1280-h904-v0

7f334b52-8472-499e-9a90-88909334b421

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxFKGMT7usqRbE8N_PrDAM_MuPQaXtKRhQGjJhcFdRoiAPQcttaQ7U0SDT1ELjNBCJpRUjIYZUGCc9hSutlQRZNpzetAvGqJa1_5WMhilFXgbsZGBI8pjXdk7_dgwnZDEMWQAJs0g=w1280-h952-v0

c170db1d-0701-4afe-a52d-d0da00da9146

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyn017G4X4Cs9DdqH85QZx4R53PZpFrWcwn4jB38FChPBH-yeuhDGfiAdjkkVeRN2pf-GGK46a00kKpKykeVkDXQQHxCaOSEF2SA4voA9RTclyamBlK_RgROo8N2hZfF29FnecyEQ=w101-h128-v0

2b5f73fd-714b-48b3-8982-39de7fc09af9

 

32 X the people HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT WE KNOW? X 33 

Ai 

I 

Ai 

31 

1 13 

Ml 

liiyiU i 

if 

3,3 

ii 

/ ’ 

I1 ■ i 

Mailboxes and Relay Boxes (a.k.a. Danna's old Pony Express mailboxes) 

Photo by Elliott R. Plack, Own work, CCO, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/indcx.php?curid=l 13397578. 

Al 

3/3 

3/ 

ZK/ 

3 

11 

-A-

 

When my husband and our friends learned of my belief, drey were beyond 

amused. They explained that the green boxes were called relay boxes-storage 

boxes where postal workers could leave large bags of mail that they would then 

deliver throughout the neighborhood. The relay boxes relieved the mail earn­ 

ers of having to carry tons of mail around the city all day. My husband started 

callingthe relay boxes “Danna’s old Pony Express mailboxes.” And I’ll be hon­ 

est: to this day, when I see the green relay storage boxes, I have a fleeting mo­ 

ment of “Wow, I can’t believe they r/z/fhaven’t removed those old boxes. ” 

Also in the early 2000s, our dear friends started to have families. Within 

a year, we knew live couples who had given birth to baby boys. At that point, 1 

 

. .1 

 

my husband and 1 got pregnant, we had\a have a baby girl because our friends 

had “taken up all the boy slots.” So, when we learned we were having a baby in 

2004 and the ultrasound revealed a baby boy, 1 thought there was agood chance 

the doctor had read it wrong. Lo and behold, in December 2004 we had a 

healthy baby boy. 

In high school, my friends and I loved going to the boys’ basketball games 

on Friday nights. When the referee called a foul against our team, and a player 

from the other team approached the foul line to take a shot, al I the fans from my 

‘ school would boo and holler to try to distract the player. One night my friend 

: randomly-and loudly-yelled the word “raisins.” The opposing team’s player 

missed the basket. He tried another shot, she yelled “raisins” again, and he 

missed again. Soon we were all yelling “raisins” and the other team kept missing 

the foul shots. We observed, with our own eyes, that yelling “raisins” caused 

; them to miss. For the entire season, my friends and I yelled “raisins" when the 

other team was at the foul line. It filled us with glee, and even if the player made 

the shot, we were convinced we were successfully sabotaging the opposing 

team. 

We-all of us-are wrong about lots of things. And although my mispercep­ 

tions about mailboxes, the sex of my baby, and the magic powers of the word 

. “raisins” might seem arbitrary, they’re not. They are all motivated by my psy­ 

chological needs and desires. I wanted to comprehend why these big green 

; mailboxes had no mail slots, so my brain came up with an answer for me. I 

wanted io feel like I had some control over my pregnancy by knowing the sex 

of the baby before the doctors were able to tell me, so my brain came up with 

an answer for me. I wanted to feel like I was part of a community with my high 

school friends and classmates, united in opposition to our out-group (the rival 

team), so my brain (and my friends) came up with an answer for me. Observa-

nous :iir iheon laden- and my obsenaiionsofthc world, and the ihenries that

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAxxEvBmaLU8OCbpGtqYVIaeDjFMUUqKLWsEhI49sMI8SNfkLYrkZWORPP0GatfgtOQzsqHXW2SDBB6IW88ph3f4MSHAFWSAfEsSF2JCsFyWuI6D-r8cFDepV-oMgIbBOqqHDNIl2g=w1280-h909-v0

28cbb432-c638-4523-b0e3-94036980523b

 

H-ii ■A A 

A?? 

J 

:i 

jipUpi 

A"' 

A: A ■ A 

A 

A Ik 

lit 

ii 

informed them, served illy own needs and desires for comprehension, control, 

and community.1* 

Comprehension motives (also called epistemic motives) capture our 

desire to feel as though the world makes sense to us. These motivations en­ 

courage us to identify cause and effect relationships and to see patterns in 

events, even when those relationships and patterns aren’t there.9 This tendency 

is functional and adaptive. It helps us live more efficiently and helps us survive. 

An inability to recognize cause and effect relationships would be an absolute 

liindrance to our survival. Imagine if we could not predict that touching fire 

would cause us to get burned or that animals baring their teeth are likely 

poised to attack. The human species might be extinct in just a few generations. 

But while these tendencies are adaptive, they can also lead us to identify causal 

relationships where they don’t exist. This is because these motivations are 

more about feeling as though we comprehend things than they are about actu­ 

ally being accurate in what we comprehend. It is enough for us to feel like we 

“get it,” without having to verify that our understanding is correct. So when I 

concocted the story that the green mailboxes didn’t have slots because they 

were from an outdated postal system, that answer-even though it was 

wrong-was good enough for me. 

While we are motivated to feel like we comprehend the world, we are also 

motivated to feel like we have control over our worlds. Control motives (also 

called existential motives) concern our desire to feel as though we are safe or in 

control-again, not necessarily to be safe or have control. After my friends had 

all given birth to baby boys, my belief that they had used up all the boy slots 

offered me a sense of control over something that was clearly out of my hands. 

That feeling of control was good enough for me. 

Finally, we have adesire for community. By sharing beliefs with members 

of our social group, we feel closer to them and feel like we are being good mem-

AAA ; 

n 

A-

■At' 

A k ■ ; 

.W 

A ’PAA" 

The three Cs 

COMPREHENS!ON_ 

We want to make sense of our world. 

CONTROL 

We want to have some control over our world. 

COMMUNITY 

We want to be a part of a social group. 

hers of our group. Once my friends and I were yelli ng “raisins” to sabotage the 

other basketball team, why would I cwhave challenged that misperception? It 

.. Mi fekgood to share that with my friends. Socially motivated misperceptions like 

"'A-,' A (his typically operate in service ofboth in-group bonding and intergroup con- 

'.,s v. flict, like believing that yelling “raisins” would sabotage our rival team. Did 

it actually sabotage our rival team? No. But it lek like it did, and that was good 

enough for me. Notice that these examples are not about my belief in false information that 

has been jharedwith me. My false beliefs about mailboxes, babies, and basket- 

pAXAc:? ball foul shots were not the result of “misinformation”—dial is, false informa­ nt A' tion shared by people unaware that the information is false. Nor were they the 

result of “disinformation”—that is, false information shared intentionally and 

strategically by people tryingto deceive.10 Instead, the examples I just offered 

are falsehoods that I have told myself-to help me make sense, feel in control, 

?A;A / arid feel a part of my group. 

While I will spend significant time in later chapters exploring belief in mis- 

and disinformation that is shared with us, it’s important to recognize just how 

much of our “wrongness” can comejfew us. In fact, even when we believe mis- 

information that has been shared with us, or disinformation designed to de- 

ceive us, the resulting misperceptions—our beliefs in the things that aren’t 

true—largely stem from us. In later chapters we will learn how our needs for 

comprehension, control, and community are informed by our social identity. 

We wifi also learn how our identity-based needs are often deliberately cultivated A- 

■

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAw3VvktCnEtZUeP6cV_drEVnYMnl5XnN_i5CjcDox3no_mgw9m_7m0BUuA1pJC_g5WbwzBBisnGAl2ak2oF__9PwDt-qWLsWigE1bFGt0J6y8LZVhOnj3OT4AGdB795f-KNq4at=w1280-h904-v0

550ab964-4697-4028-a588-9ea503252290

 A 

36 X THE PEOPLE 

HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT WE KNOW? X 37 

i i 

Aa; 

■ A■'A 

and exploited by political and media elites. But by starting out with a consider­ 

ation of how much of the misinformation problem stems from us, we mightlater 

recognize that we have the agency to disrupt these dynamics. 

-K'. ■ , 

■ 

Comprehension 

; i a 

' ’ T A' 

■ ? 

A' 

A 

A a DA 

■ 

A A 

■ 'b 

> ' ■ 

a?T A ? 

Our motivation to feel like we understand the world around us drives us to 

quickly and efficiently draw conclusions based on the information available 

to us. Misperceptions that come from these epistemic or sense-making moti­ 

vations are closely tied to how carefully we are thinking. My conclusion about 

the green mailboxes was just a shortcut that my brain created to account for 

the lack of a slot on the mailboxes. It wasn’t the result of research or investiga­ 

tion. These kinds of errors in understanding come from our tendency to make 

judgments quickly and efficiently, using as little mental energy as possible. 

This makes sense. Thinkinglongandhardabouteverythinginourworklwould 

leave us unable to function. We would be stymied-and therefore vulnerable 

to threats. Now, in the context of my hasty conclusion about the weird green 

mailboxes, if I had stood at the street corner for a while, examining the mail­ 

box, and asked some passersby what it was, I probably wouldn’t have experi­ 

enced any severe threats. I would have been late to wherever I was going, and 

I likely would have annoyed people who found me strange. But otherwise, 

thinking long and hard about why this mailbox looked the way it did wouldn’t 

have affected much. 

But now imagine it was thousands of years ago, and instead of mailing a 

letter, I was out picking berries. And instead of a mailbox that didn’t look like 

any mailbox I had ever seen before, itwas a weird-looking large cat that didn’t 

look like any cat. I had ever seen before. As I stand there, examining the ani­ 

mal, 1 look for a passerby to whom 1 might inquire, “Excuse me, dear sir. Do 

 

IIt AETATA . 

AT 

: A 

- TA i . ' 

T 

"i TA / 

T?TaTt; 

: ■ 1: ? ■. A - ? 

A 

? 

A^aaA? . 

; . ; A a 

} ' ATTA 

■ T atAa 

. 'at-A. 

■ 

A' 'TT? 

' TTA ■ 

. A-/ 

t' At, 

AAA? 

fur standing on end and he appears to be poised for attack. But before I do any­ 

thing rash, I want to be sure I have properly identified him.” 

Speed and efficiency are essential to survival in the wild, but they also in­ 

crease our likelihood of being wrong.11 Importantly, not all human beings are 

equally likely to prioritize speed and efficiency when making decisions. Some 

people take their time and think long and hard before forming a judgment or 

decision. This is true for people with high levels of a psychological trait called 

need for cognition,” a trait that captures how much people enjoy-or get sat-

isfaction from—thinking hard and solving problems.12 People who are high in 

“need for cognition” are more likely to evaluate and reevaluate information be-

fore updating their beliefs, and so are less susceptible to mis- and disinforma-

lion.13 Another trait associated with careful thinking is cognitive reflection.14 

But before I say too much about cognitive reflection, humor me for a moment. 

Consider how you might answer the following questions from Shane Freder­ 

ick's Cognitive Reflection Test:15 

A bat and a ball cost $ 1.10 in total. The bat costs $ 1.00 more 

9 

than the ball. How much does the ball cost?_____ cents 

If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long 

would it take 100 machines to make 100 widgets?_____  

minutes 

In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch dou­ 

bles in size. If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire 

lake, how long would it take for the patch to cover half ofthe lake? 

__ ___ days 

Tins three -question test measures whether an individual will arrive at an 

jntuitivc, but inaccurate, conclusion or whether they will engage in the kind of 

 

 

l« 

11 

II 

Ki 8 

1 

II II; 

w 

II 

I i! 

11 H 

I 

II 

II 

ISi 

II 

response. If you’re answering quickly and efficiently. chances are you’ll an­ 

swer (1) 10 cents, (2) 100 minutes, and (3) 24 days. 

And you would be wrong. 

But if you engage in careful analytical reasoning, you might get to the cor­ 

rect answers: (1) 5 cents, (2) 5 minutes, and (3) 47 days. Or, ifyou’relike me 

and you’re impatient and prone to efficiency over reflection, you can be fully 

aware that your intuitive response is incorrect, try to come to a less intuitive 

correct response, think for 15 minutes, and still answer all three items incor­ 

rectly. This is probably bad. Researchers have found that people who score 

lower in cognitive reflection are more likely to believe false information shared 

online.1” They also tend to follow sources on social media that are less repu­ 

table than the sources that people with higher scores follow.17 

In general, studies point to meaningfill variation in the way that people 

interact with and understand their worlds. While all of us are somewhat moti­ 

vated by efficiency and use cognitive shortcuts (called heuristics) forguidance, 

some rely on heuristics more than others. Individuals who have a high level of 

the trait “need for closure,” lor example, tend to prioritize efficiency over ac- 

curacy, especially under conditions of urgency.18 These individuals are uncom­ 

fortable with uncertainty and ambiguity and prefer to have answers sooner 

rather than later. People who are high in need for closure and low in need for 

cognition tend to use their emotions to guide their beliefs and behaviors—for 

example, angry: attack, happy: relax, fearful: run, aroused: approach. While 

those who need closure tend to form judgments more efficiently, this approach 

is also more likely to result in errors in judgment and recall.19 

Control 

When Iwas a high school freshman, I concocted all kinds of falsehoods to make 

me feel like I had agency . I believed that brushing my hair would make it grow 

Iiukt and dial 1 could (an more quickly by lying on top of ray picnic table 

{rather (han on the ground) because I’d be doser to the sun (it was the early 

HMDs; tanning was still a thing). As a teen consumed with self-image, who 

hit hitk' of her life was in her control, I felt a sense of agency from these ego- 

dri\en lies. Needing a sense of control is central to many of die lies we tell ourselves. 

W h tie we may outgrow the distinct challenges of adolescence, the salience of 

। n her things, such as our own mortality, can take their place. In 1973, cultural 

uni hropologist Ernest Becker proposed a sweeping account of contemporary 

society, based on the idea that just about everything we do here-from com­ 

merce to war to art to religion—is designed to manage our fears of, and lack of 

control over, our own death.20 His book The Denial of Death inspired social 

scientists to develop terror management theory (TMT).21 TMT posits that 

humans are uniquely capable of thinking abstractly about the inevitability of 

I heir own death. But, to avoid perseverating on our own death and ruminating 

ourselves into oblivion, TMT suggests that we engage in various protective 

st rategies, including maintaining a cultural worldview, developing self-esteem 

and theories of immortality (like religion), and investing in close attachments 

with loved ones.22 But, as scientists Ajit Varki and Danny Brower argue, some 

of the strategies we use to avoid thoughts of death involve self-deception: “It 

is important to note that denial of mortality is part of a much broader concept 

about our human ability to deny many other aspects of reality, especially when 

such realities are not to our liking.. . . We go further in our denial of reality, 

hoi di ng completely false beliefs about many things even in the face of the cold, 

hard facts.”23 

Rituals and superstitions, for example, may help us feel like we can pre­ 

vent bad things from happening, including death.24 Underestimating our like­ 

lihood of contracting a contagious disease makes us feel safe and in control.25

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyq5ytAznC7Ujf2TF0Bc-d6WjW0lKJ-Lf2uc2AEnZDPGtXwU1_3aAaON1gI_RKxefVdE84Wr0T3K2IFGglZhvNi_2Iy-hSGgIjCy9jElosRh9SZ6eMdQILjV1FPbbVX5mg4N57EEA=w1280-h910-v0

e88be689-afb8-4c78-bc11-02df05011c9d

 

 HOW 1)0 

a 

' : • - : i: 

■ • 

gl: 

Pl' & 

i 

PS f-.-p Ui 

||l 

!i Hl Us 

ii■fl.: 

fill 

These beliefs do not make us safer. They do not increase our agency. But they 

do increase our perceptions of safety and agency. 

For example, religion is a faith-based belief system that is unable to be em­ 

pirically veri fied or falsified.26 Regardless of its ultimate truth value, it is aframe- 

work that humans use to manage their terror about death, largely through the 

proposition of a powerful deity who influences events on earth, and some form 

of life after death. Research has shown that religion manages our fear of death 

quite well. Religiosity mitigates the negative effects of mortality salience (death 

thoughts) on well-being, especially when the religious beliefs are firmly held.27 

In rare but extreme cases, individuals’ need for control over an uncontrolla­ 

ble world may contribute to false beliefs that cause them to engage in pathological 

behaviors. In the case of obsessive-compulsive disorder, for example, people are 

made so anxious by their lack of control, they may believe that the performance of 

certain ritualistic behaviors will help them impose order on their worlds.28 In 

other words, their misperception is that by performing the ritual (counting, wash­ 

ing hands, etc.), bad things will not happen. These invasive-and false-beliefs 

can be debilitating, as the behaviors fail to alleviate the fears and anxieties. 

It turns out that people often bel ieve things that aren’t true because those 

falsehoods can provide them a kind of hope that reality doesn’t. As my friend 

and colleague Dr. Brian Southwell explains about belief in medical misinfor­ 

mation, “Sometimes misinformation offers hope in the face ofa devastating dis­ 

ease or dire condition and that’s why it gains traction among people.”29 It 

turns out, people really need hope. 

Wc might come to hold false beliefs because wc believe that 

Sil' ^people like me believe this,” and so the false beliefs make us feel close to our 

y gioup. or because wc want to actively engage in social interactions that stem 

‘ > >1/ Irnm a given belief—as when people talk to members of their in-group about 

how ihcy all believe the earth is flat. 

Moy ■ Dcpendingon the nature of the falsehood, the content of that false belief 

Thigh’ help me and my group feel good about ourselves while justifying our 

<‘l moral superiority toward members of the out-group. This explains the 

io w 

fey ©Hsu-nee of false beliefs held to justify and maintain divisions in social status, 

/ ■ wealth, and power that might be disproportionately distributed across dit- 

T' " {brent social groups. The false belief that different races or ethnicities are 

inltercntly intellectually inferior, for example, is something that people use to 

justily harmful racial and social hierarchies (remember eugenics?).30 The 

fc.psychological and social appeal of racially motivated falsehoods accounts in part 

B for the prevalence and influence of mis- and disinformation that reinforces ra- 

, eial hierarchies and racial conflict.31 

Such socially motivated falsehoods can also justify feelings of disgust and 

dehumanization toward out-groups—like the 16 percent of Americans polled 

in 2021 who agreed that “the government, media, and financial worlds in the 

y.., US are controlled by a group of Satan-worshipping pedophiles who run a 

’ global child sex-trafficking operation.”32 If you believe that powerful people 

jait doing criminal, horrible things, then being disgusted by them, seeing them 

ps less than human, and even engaging i n violence to stop them might be seen as 

i 

a 

fif 

Community 

Community, the social dimension of wrongness, is a central tenet of this book. 

Falsehoods can bring us closer to the people we want to feel closer to (our 

in-group) while distancing us from people we want to feel farther from (our 

' justified moral responses. 

Conspiracy Theories: A Special Kind of Fiction 

ft ’ Thal last example-believing that the government, media, and financial worlds 

f/U in the United States are controlled by agroup of Satan-worshippingpedophiles

t? & hie mm pow!- k\ow wii\t ur i-ww n 

If 

...." 

smI i . ..H; 

ill; 

iM < 

M st: ll|H 

if 

IB n I Sin 

Ilf iff 

1' 1 

■ > 

■as B 

1 If If f Mi 11 

who run aglobal child sex-trafficking operation-is one of a host of beliefs tied to 

the conspiracy tbeoiy known as QAnon. And while actual conspiracies do exist, 

as they did during the Watergate cover-up or when researchers failed to provide 

lifesaving care to Black study participants in the Tuskegee syphilis study in the 

1950s, conspiracytheories are allegations of conspiracy that remain unsubstan­ 

tiated. They “attempt to explain the ultimate causes of significant social and po­ 

litical events and circumstances with claims of secret plots by two or more 

powerful actors.”33 They also assume that powerful people operating in the 

shadows are bad actors deliberately keeping the public in the dark.34 

In the QAnon conspiracy theory, Q is an anonymous internet poster who 

is said to have inside knowledge of criminal activity among powerful liberal 

leaders-Democrats and media celebrities—involving crimes against children. 

Q would post premonitions and allegations cloaked in mystery and coded lan­ 

guage. Over time, Q’s following grew. The QAnon conspiracy theory soon 

evolved into a “big tent conspiracy theory” that included references to count­ 

less elites, various historical figures, and world events.35 According to some 

QAnon supporters, Donald Trump’s presidency was orchestrated by military 

leaders to help expose child sexual abuse among Democratic elites and to 

break up their criminal conspiracy ring. Some QAnon supporters also be­ 

lieved that, after his electoral loss in 2020, President Trump would appear in 

Dallas, Texas, in November 2021, where he would be reinstated as president 

and would announce the late John F. Kennedyjr. as his vice president.36 

The “Big Lie” was built on conspiracy theories and was embraced by many 

groups, far beyond just QAnon supporters. The rally in front of the White 

House that preceded the storming of the Capitol building was called “Stop the 

Steal ”—an expression that had circulated on right-wing social media for months 

before the election.37 The phrase “Stop the Steal” is efficient shorthand for the 

conspi racy theory that argued Democrats had i llegitimately stolen the election 

Mmi Pnsidcm Trump. hi i be weeks just after the election, a Reuters poll found 

(h,n Mi percent of Republicans (versus 16 percent of Democrats) reported the 

h< I i. I i hai d ie elect ion was rigged-specifically that state vote counters had un- 

hni U handed the election to Biden.38 Meanwhile, 77 percent of Trump voters, 

v ci so s 261 ktcc! 11 of Biden voters, reported that voting in the United States was 

pro in- to fraud.39 

This last study, conducted by social psychologists Gordon Pennycook and 

I id Rand in the week immediately following the 2020 election, also exam­ 

ined what events or evidence might alter Trump voters’ beliefs about the elec- 

i ion oi itcome. What would change their minds? If Trump conceded, would they 

< hange their minds? IfTrump lost all his legal challenges, would they change 

(heir minds? One would imagine that just one ofthese would convince Repub­ 

licans that President Biden had been legitimately elected and that the election 

was free and fair. But Pennycook and Rand found that 40 percent of Trump 

oilers reported that neither Trump’s concession nor his loss of every legal chal­ 

lenge would convince them that he really did lose the election. As depressing 

as (his finding is, the reality was even worse. By December 2021, long after 

Trump had conceded the election to President Biden, long after Trump had lost 

all his legal challenges in courts across the country, a whopping 71 percent of 

Republicans still reported the belief that Biden’s win was illegitimate.40 And 

(his belief persisted despite the fact that the reasons they had previously cited 

lor disbelieving Biden’s victory (false claims about votes from dead people, 

votes from noncitizens, and fraudulent ballots) had all been debunked and 

thrown out of courts across the country. For many Republicans, the Big Lie 

had generated what scholar Emily Thorson calls a “belief echo.” Their broader 

attitudes toward Trump and the legitimacy of the election results persisted even 

after the specific false claims had been discredited with evidence.41 

Using the language of epistemology, what 71 percent ofRepublicans were 

engaging in was nonfalsifiable reasoning. They were not updating their percep-

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwnB0NG7J4PCzC9NE8kAIux3jI6NMlOGtPMBbWNUyfP_OLUmAaTq0C9eauRLz0glN6G79HQBzejER7mpxoK7jeGKmny2l4y1IFWR-19w-H8k76tEuTSucimTRKcuHDaxClqyY-o2A=w1280-h904-v0

0af3beb1-323e-4a45-b084-4cb7e608192b

 HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT W E KNOW ? X la44 X the people 

17 

A® ay 

|| 

y I/' 

* • ■; 

■ u 

■ g' 

ys 

i-j a: Id 

did ■< 

id:? 

' I :e 

■ 

tion of truth in the face of new evidence. Instead, they doubted the credibility 

of the institutions providing that evidence, allowing them to ignore it alto­ 

gether.42 The nonfalsifiability of the Big Lie is what makes it so powerful. No 

matter what evidence one might bring to bear on the lie, in the minds of the 

believers, there is always a reason to throw that evidence out. By refusing to 

trust the institutions and people charged with safeguarding election outcomes 

(courts and local election officials), by questioning the motives of journalists 

covering the election, they can dismiss contradictory evidence as “fake news.” 

Conspiracy theories are unable to be falsified by design. Their inability to be 

“disproved” is what makes them especially sticky. Legal scholars Adrian 

Vermeule and Cass Sunstein describe conspiracy theories as “self-sealing,” 

which makes them “particularly immune to challenge.”43 Put simply, any evi­ 

dence you might introduce to disprove the theory is reframed by the conspir­ 

acy theorist as more evidence of the depth and genius of the conspiracy plot. 

When confronted with disconfirming evidence, the conspiracy theorist can 

simply say, “See? They’re all in on it.” 

Like the Big Lie about the 2020 election, much of the misinformation re­ 

lated to COVID-19 was also rooted in conspiracy-theory narratives, typically 

involving beliefs about political figures or other elites operating in the shad­ 

ows to make money, acquire power, and undermine the will of, or cause harm 

to, the public. In 2020, this included the following beliefs: the pharmaceutical 

industry created COVID to make more money, the US government exagger­ 

ated the risk of COVID to hurt President Trump, and the government cov­ 

ered up the fact that wearing face masks actually makes you sicker.44 As the 

vaccines were rolled out in 2021, new COVID conspiracy theories emerged. 

These theories focused on unsubstantiated risks of the vaccine, including the 

proposition that the vaccine would implant a microchip inside your body so Bill 

 

- V 

UgL 

■ A. 

spiracy theories peddled false information about the harms posed by the vac 

cine and claims of a deliberate cover-up of information about those harms by 

scientists and the government. Amongthese false claims were vaccinated । >c< >pl< 

“shedding the virus” to others, as well as the vaccine causing infertility, cans 

ing many deaths, or making people magnetic.46 

Conspiracy Theories: All Three Cs ’•x? .■ 

While the most well-known conspiracy theories are those spread by citizens 

k or political leaders, the internal logic of conspi racy theories is so alt nu t ivc t hut 

y we may even come up with conspiracy theories on our own. A few days after 

Russia attacked Ukraine in 2022 and the United States placed sanctions 

U on Russia in retaliation, I was watching the news on television when suddenly 

A 

our power went out. Having just learned about the economic sanctions that 

the United States had placed on Russia and that Russia might retaliate with a 

cyberattack, I confidently said, “It’s probably a Russian cyberattack.” Within 

u few minutes, though, the lights came back on, power was restored, and we 

gt learned that it was just a temporary short circuit limited to our block. Not the 

> Russians. Soon thereafter, I got a call from my 82-year-old mother ......plain 

Ing that her email wasn’t workingand that it was “probably the Russians'I he 

conspiracy theorist doesn’t Call far from the tree, it seems. 

(Conspiratorial thinking is attractive because it satisfies all thre< need', and 

urges that typically drive onr sense-making—the trifecta of m<.aning making 

comprehension, control, and community. 

Comprelicnsion through Conspiracy Theories 

Gimspiracy theories allow ns io “connect the dots” and led like we comprehend 

things that arc otherwise inexplicable. (lonspintcy theories arc thus more likely 

https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAyjRXteLE9MVe42NVDrGuVFyDryHR7R8nvnmmB3lJhNduvNc94C08ZIEioseT8QdLbt5prLkJO72khS6pbINAZZf8I5YU1c37S7sDNd4eietnYjpMZIlYGRZmuFIrCWlDAtH4aceA=w1280-h914-v0

bff1b7f5-5380-422e-a6a2-36de1a5b561c

HOW 1X1 WB BXOW Wn vrwr KNOW? X 

 

Is 

: ? 

X rut-: rail'Ll-; 

7 ® 

H 

hi ■ 

III 

■ 5 1 

a 

J ll 

high in “need for closure,” who dislike ambiguity and prefer predictability and 

clear, fixed answers.4,8 Human beings are also generally biased in favor of 

“agency detection,” meaning we generally see events as the outcomes of 

someone’s or something’s actions, rather than as random chaos.49 As social 

scientists Jan-Willem Van Prooijen and Karen Douglas explain, “People tend 

to perceive events as caused by intentional agents.”50 However, whereas some 

people are higher in need for closure than others, some people are higher in 

agency detection than others. I, admittedly, am high in agency detection. 

I also ascribe intentionality to individuals, animals, and objects. Work by 

Karen Douglas has shown that anthropomorphism-1^ tendency to attribute 

human characteristics to anything other than abuman being-is a form of agency 

detection that is positively associated with conspiracy theory beliefs.51 My natu­ 

ral state is to anthropomorphize all things: plants, trees, flowers, and even cut­ 

lery. I once wrote a college French essay about how, when looking at a table 

setting, it is evident that the fork is rhe husband, the spoon is the wife, and the 

knife is the aggressive male lover who has separated the fork and the spoon with 

a plate. It seems my psychological traits accurately predict that I am the person 

who would explain a brief neighborhood power outage with a stoiy of a secret 

Russian plot. 

Control through Conspiracy Theories 

“Connecting the dots” and concocting human-centered stories to account for 

chaotic events might also—at least temporarily—serve our need for control. Con­ 

trol motives help explain why we find greater belief in conspiracy theories 

among people who feel powerless.52 Even when aperson’s sense of control has 

been manipulated, as in a study by experimental researchers, this can affect con­ 

spiracy theory belief?3 In a reassuring set of findings from Jan-Willem van 

Prooijen and Michele Acker, just getting respondents to recall a situation in 

■ 

1$!^? winch “something happened, and they were in complete control of the situa-

os® ti<m” was enough to reduce their conspiracy theory beliefs.54 

Part of the control function offered by conspiracy theories may stem fromg Si•w .' -:,r.r 

if 

their ability to generate a feeling of anger.55 Anger is a mobilizing emotion that 

- we lend to experience when we perceive a threat and have some sense ofeer-

1' Utility about the nature of the threat and what to do about it56 Unlike fear, which 

we experience in the face of threat combined with uncertainty (and which may 

We «« feeling pessimistic), anger provides agency and optimism?7 By giving 

■ W US fl target to which we can direct our anger—the bad people operating in the 

shadows-conspiracy theories can make us feel hopeful and provide a logical 

i nurse of action: get the bad guys.58 

aMjgfe',:'-

AmonggToups who feel that they are lower status or somehow losing, con-

SB-^^^piracy theories can allow them to save face by blaming their losing status on 

Oli orchestrated plot against them.59 This explains why people who vote for the 

' losing political candidate are more likely to believe conspiracy theories related 

|||||^ an election,60 like Jenny Cudd from Midland, Texas, who stormed the Capitol. 

53 ‘? 

1 his also accounts for the appeal of the racist right-wing conspiracy theory 

^■£0=? known as replacement theory, which argues that liberals and elites are defiber-

' nwly encouraging immigration from nonwhite, non-Christian countries to 

; “replace” whites and Christians and dilute their political and cultural power.61 

Following the mass shooting in a Black neighborhood grocery store in Buf- 

faJo, New York, by a while supremacist who embraced “great replacement 

■ -

f T, theory,” the New York Nick Confessore explained, “Like all conspir- 

■ acy theories, the ‘great replacement’ provides, for some people, a comforting 

>and also angering explanation for changes that they see around them.”62 

The desire for control and safety also explains why conspiracy theories arise 

‘ in response io horrifying, unthinkable events, like the attacks on September 11, 

' £ ? 2001, orthe mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in2012. Large 

X mr. I’lioi’i.i: now >xx u s:so\\ wiivrwi:. wow: X W 

.Si 

..i| 

«i ilsH if 

a al «■! w® 

I 

I 

■ 

mass casualty events-terrorist attacks, mass shooti ngs, and natural disasters- 

make us feel afraid, uncertain, and insecure. We have trouble processi ng their 

horror. We want to assume they didn’t really happen. And if we are willing to 

admit to ourselves that the events did occur, we are governed by the adage “Ma­ 

jor events have major causes.”63 In the face of events like these, sweeping con­ 

spiracy theories seem more plausible than the notion that just one or two people 

(or nature) could cause such vast devastation. Narratives that offer alternative 

explanations for these terrifying moments, especially narratives that propose the 

events were either preventable or staged, promise to make us feel safer. To the 

listeners of InfoWars propagandist Alex Jones, this was part of the appeal of 

his Sandy Hook conspiracy theories. For years after the horrific event, Jones 

alleged that the shooting never really happened and that the victims’ families 

were “crisis actors” hired to perform the role of grieving family members.64 For 

people unable or unwilling to face the prospect of twenty kindergartners be­ 

ing massacred in their classroom, Jones’s fiction provided an escape hatch. 

It is clear from the literature on conspiracy theory beliefs that fear, threat, 

and uncertainty are associated with a higher likelihood of conspiratorial think­ 

ing. As van Prooijen writes, “Feelings of uncertainty and fear . . . cause an 

activation—and frequently, an overactivation-of the human tendencies to per­ 

ceive patterns and detect agency.”65 Faced with uncertainty and threat, we crave 

comprehension and control even more than usual. And when these urges are 

on overdrive, they encourage us to grab on to whatever story fits the bill. 

The uncertainty and sense of threat in the early days of the coronavirus pan­ 

demic provided the perfect storm for conspiracy theory beliefs to thrive.66 

Two conspiracy theories suggested we didn’t need to worry so much about the 

virus: the belief that the coronavirus was fake and that the medical community 

was exaggerating COVID death rates. Some COVID beliefs also suggested 

simple solutions. If people believed that 5G cell phone towers were somehow 

amphfxingor spreading(’.OVID, which somepeople did, then the solution was 

■ample: burn down the cell phone towers. Which some people did.67 

(liven i hat social isolation has been found to be associated with various su- 

I >< rsf it ions and conspiracy beliefs,68 it seems the isolating experience of quar- 

animcs and lockdowns may have contributed to COVID conspiracy theory 

beliefs as well, either through alack of interpersonal interaction or through 

increased time spent online, where coronavirus misinformation thrived.”9 

Com inunity through Conspiracy Theories 

While conspiracy theories may offer us a promise of comprehension and con- 

i rol, they serve our need for community as well. Remember how proud the in­ 

surrectionist Jenny Cudd was because she had “fucking charged the Capitol 

w i I h patriots”? The human desire to connect with members of a group and mon- 

ilor intergroup hostilities is central to the function of conspiracy theories. 

Van Prooijen explains that conspiracy theory beliefs involve the perception that 

“hostile coalitions” are working against the interest of other groups.70 Con­ 

spiracy theories increase in-group cohesion while emphasizing the threat posed 

by an out-group (bad actors operating in the shadows). Conspiracy theories also 

efficiently reinforce social identity and mobilize the in-group toward action. Ac­ 

cording to Van Prooijen, “Conspiracy theories have a clear social dimension. 

A conspiracy by definition is a hostile outgroup, and most conspiracy theories 

specify how the suspected conspiracy harms or deceives a larger collective of 

people.”71 In a fascinating evolutionary psychological account of the social functions 

of misinformation and conspiracy theories, political scientist Michael Bang 

Petersen proposes that false beliefs among the public-especialiy those associ­ 

ated with elite-spread disinformation-are more about taking action than they 

are about “believing things. ”72 He suggests that fringe beliefs held within the

 Ifia Haba 

If 

fills fW® gffi 

50 X the people 

11® H 

il® 

III 

111 

ill 

III 

Hl IB| I 

Ss S 

I " I Hi 

iif. 

ill 

If 

sufH 

IB i 

Bl WB; H i 

Sil Ja 

J 

group help solve what he calls “the coordination problem,” the difficult task 

of coordinating the behaviors of large numbers of individuals all at once. It’s 

not that people have been manipulated into suddenly believing something that 

is false, butthat the belief (which tends to complement existing intergroup con­ 

flict) signals group membership and mobilizes group action. Writes Petersen, 

“The psychology of coordination helps explain why people happily believe 

preposterous things without a need to resort to notions of manipulation. 

From a coordination perspective, the primary function of fringe beliefs is thus 

not epistemic but social: They serve as a signal to others about your alle­ 

giances.”73 Viewed this way, false conspiratorial beliefs like “the election was 

rigged” or “Bill Gates is implanting a microchip through the vaccine” are 

about what team you’re on, who you’re opposed to, and what you’re going to 

do about it (e.g., storm the Capitol and not get vaccinated). Conspiracy theo­ 

ries are quite good at “solving the coordination problem.” Political scientist 

Yongkwang Kim found that not only were individuals who believed in con­ 

spiracy theories the same people with high rates of participation in the 2012 

election (including attending rallies, wearing campaign buttons, or signing 

petitions) , but after experimental participants saw election-related conspiracy 

theories, they became more likely to participate, even more than people ex­ 

posed to similar but nonconspiratorial election information.74 

A Matter of Trust 

i 

The social roots of conspiracy theory beliefs also help explain the close rela­ 

tionship between conspiracy theory beliefs and trust. Conspiracy theory beliefs 

are higher among both those who do not trust other people75 and those who 

don’t trust institutions like government and media.76 Given that most conspir­ 

acy theories are about deception by elites working within our existing institu-

HOW DO WE KNOW WHAT WE KNOW? X 5 1 

iiii® OB 

...................................... i tons, the latter of these associations is quite intuitive. If you believe that people 

working in government, media, science, or medicine are in it for themselves 

or power hungry, it’s not a huge leap to believe they are coordinating in secret 

io harm the public and help themselves. In the very early days ofthe COVID 

pandemic, psychologist Daniel Freeman andhis colleagues studied COVID-19 

conspiracy theory beliefs among citizens in the UK. They found that these be­ 

liefs were most prevalent among people with low levels of trust in government, 

miliiary, doctors, scientists, the World Health Organization, and even the 

I Initcd Nations.77 

’ • / As described by media scholar Ethan Zuckerman, a lack of institutional 

1111si fosters “the loss of a single collective reality.”78 Without trust in the in- 

sdiuiions and experts charged with creating and disseminating informa-

11 

"'IB Jif 

ft 

ft 

ft 

y\ 

ij 

1 

if 

(ion, members of the public will look elsewhere to fill in the gaps of their 

\ understanding—perhaps to friends, social media, or partisan political leaders. 

(Y v < wr that over the last half century America has experienced a vast erosion of 

(riiM in government,79 media,80 and education, it follows that information from 

', i hew institutions is increasingly likely to be met by a skeptical public, leaving 

us more susceptible to mis- and disinformation. 

The role of trust in shaping our belief in false information highlights how 

much of our understanding of the world is derived from knowledge communi- 

< mini io us by experts and official sources. Most of us do not have access to spe- 

emh/ed knowledge in all things. Our direct observations of the world certainly 

don’t get us there. We rely on experts and institutions to provide it for us. In ’ft” 

I lot oj Pe< pie Are Saying: The New Conspiradsm and the Assault on Dernoc- 

Asa 

' on ।. political science professors Russell Muirhead and Nancy Rosenblum put 

a plainly. “Much of what we know, or think we know, we take on trust,”81 We 

arc uoi the ones conducting scientific experiments on the safety ofthe C0V1D 

 

vaccines or coun tingmail-in ballots oirelection day. We know CO VID vaccines 

are safe and the 2020 election was conducted properly because we trust 

what members of our key institutions say on these matters. And ifwe don’t trust 

what these key institutions say, we may well come to believe that microchips 

are being implanted through vaccines or that bad people rigged the election— 

or both. 

IB 

ata aw ai m i 111 

III 

SW !. 

3® J 

I , I 

a! 

an Hl! 

Wi 

-

IT 

. . 

a; 

American Political Asymmetry 

As troubling as the erosion of institutional trust among the public is the asym­ 

metry in institutional trust between America’s two major political parties. 

Republicans report having significantly less trust in science, higher educa­ 

tion, media , and the federal government than Democrats do.82 And along with 

lower levels of trust, some researchers have found greater belief in conspiracy 

theories and misinformation on America’s political right.83 In cross-cultural 

studies of the relationship between political ideology and conspiracy theory 

beliefs across the globe, researchers have found that conspiracy theory be­ 

liefs are more prevalent among political extremists on both the political left 

and the political right.84 Given that our needs for comprehension, control, 

and community (needs that contribute to conspiracy theory beliefs) also 

likely contribute to the strength of people’s political beliefs, the notion that 

political extremists on both sides of the political spectrum would be more 

likely to believe conspiracy theories makes sense on its face. However, while 

cross-cultural studies suggest that conspiracy theory beliefs are the domain 

of the Far Right audthe Far Left, the American context may tell a different 

story.85 

Some research suggests that, compared with liberals, American conserva­ 

tives are more likely to believe in conspiracy theories and score higher in their 

general icmlciicy to engage in conspiratorial thinking.”6 While American lib­ 

erals arc more likely to believe conspiracy theories related to Republican pres- 

aknts Trump and Bush,”' American conservatives are more likely to hold 

empirically false beliefs on everything from President Obama’s birthplace88 to 

i he origins of COVID and climate change 89 Conservatives are also more likely 

to share false information online than are liberals.90 Communication scholars 

K. Kelly Garrett and Robert Bond found that American conservatives are less 

adept at “discriminating between political truths and falsehoods,” largely 

bemuse a greater proportion of the false claims circulating in the information 

< nvironment benefited conservatives.91 Garrett and Bond found that “socially 

ei igagingtruthful claims tended to favor the left, while engaging falsehoods dis­ 

proportionately favored the right.” In other words, there was an ideological 

asymmetry in the supply of misinformation, with more false claims favorable 

to the Right than to the Left circulating online. And because humans are gener­ 

al ly not very good at identifying false information that is biased in our favor, this 

asymmetry in misinformation supply contributed to an asymmetry in misin­ 

formation beliefs. 

In various studies of Russian disinformation efforts in the 2016 election, 

scholars found evidence of an ideological asymmetry in the supply of disinfor­ 

mation as well, with the majority of Russian-led efforts to undermine American 

democracy targeted toward conservatives.92 As Deen Freelon and his team 

concluded, “The rightward skew of the ideological asymmetry is consistent with 

the inference that the [Russian propaganda agency] IRA considers the Ameri­ 

can right wing to be especially vulnerable to disinformation attacks. ”93 

Although it is certainly not a foregone conclusion that belief in conspir­ 

acy theories and misinformation are necessarily the domain of conservatism, there may be something going on in the United States that is making it so.94

KSSU 

aeiin aa 

«« 

1111 

11® 

Xi ii SB ■ I! 

Vi sit Hi fii a 

sa 

III 

7 

54 X THE PEOPLE 

To explore potential asymmetries in American “wrongness,” we must first 

understand America’s unique and evolving political context. In the next two 

chapters, we will explore how America’s two political parties became ideologi­ 

cally polarized and sociodemographically distinct, especially on the political 

right. We will then explore how partisan identity shapes our needs for com­ 

prehension, control, and community, thus affecting what we “know” and what 

we “see.” 

isgiffaSIE 

'liOSlpga.iK 

Chapters 

MS'N 

tliJI 

f *• 

Wl# 

®8i 

Oi 

I 

a 

I 

How Did We Get So Far Apart? 

fp 

v IF1 TOLD YOU there was a man named John and asked you whether he was 

a Republican or a Democrat, you’d likely say “How would I know?” But if you ; -learned that John is a 40-year-old African American male with a college degree 

1 ■, 

and lives in a medium-size city, you might start to make some guesses about 

his political party. And if I told you I know a man named Frank who is white, 

J 

: lives in rural Texas, and is an evangelical Christian, you’d probably make some 

guesses about his political party as well. Chances are you’d say John is a Demo- 

(rat and Frank is a Republican. 

X Is this stereotyping? Yes it is. Is it possible our assumptions about John’s 

and Frank’s political parties are completely wrong? Absolutely. It’s unlikely, r 

hut il. is possible these extrapolations would be incorrect. To return to the lan- 

.F-LLV 

... gunge of how we know what we know, you probably reached these conclusions 

X using die process of deduction. You guessed that John is a Democrat because 

you have a sense that people who live in medium to large cities and who are Af- 

nran \mrncan are more likely to be Democrats. And you probably guessed 