https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/ANHLwAwnaY5818K1upee6tKFSQDI4b6GXN4yMmLiBzHZT31DP9WcqH08V2B_RN2KJi_VYdL7aVtwcwtxh0pPaIZd7wQXy0gICCQNDo6Mv42hAePbDxVvS_yDaLufS9OzgYsfh5liv1pbKw=w228-h45-v0

ea2688ab-fcff-4720-9e22-ff7c8354a1b9

Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

New Perspectives 

Interdisciplinary Journal of Central & East European Politics and International Relations

5New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

Contents 

Editorial 

Post-Truth-Telling in International Relations Nicholas Michelsen and Benjamin Tallis 

Special Section on Post-Truth Post-Truth, Postmodernism and Alternative Facts 

Colin Wight 

Careless Speech:Conceptualizing Post-Truth Politics Ari-Elmeri Hyvönen 

The Battle for Truth:Mapping the Network of Information War Experts in the Czech Republic 

Dagmar Rychnovská and Martin Kohút 

Post-Truth Politics in the UK’s Brexit Referendum Hannah Marshall and Alena Drieschova 

International Relations Scholarship at 100:Publicism, Truth-Pluralism and the Usefulness Problem 

Nicholas Michelsen 

As the Universal Breaks:Moments of Awkwardness in International Justice 

Kjersti Lohne 

IMEMO 2 0 1 8 Russia and the World:2018. IMEMO Forecast 

Update – Russia and the World, October 2018:The Autumn of Our Discontent? 

Irina Kobrinskaya 

Notes on Contributors 

7 

3 1 

1 7 

8 9 

1 0 7 

5 7 

1 3 5 

1 4 3 

1 7 5 

1 6 7

Post-Truth, Postmodernism and Alternative Facts 

COLIN WIGHT University of Sydney 

Keywords: post-truth, philosophy, politics, postmodernism, knowledge 

INTRODUCTION Ever since post-truth was declared to be the word of the year by the Oxford English Dictionary in 2 0 1 6 there has been an explosion of commentary on the issue (Ball, 2 0 1 7 ; D’Ancona, 2 0 1 7 ; Davis, 2 0 1 7 ; Keyes, 2 0 0 4 ; Levitin, 2 0 1 6 ). Although the dic-tionary account of the term is clear, its use in much of the subsequent analysis has piled confusion on top of confusion. When the term initially emerged, I had thought that it would be a temporary phenomenon. I expected it to glow brightly and then disappear ever so silently from the public gaze. After all, who could seriously be-lieve that truth did not matter? We depend on truth in every moment of our lives. Anyone wanting to test the truth of that assertion is welcome to attempt to cross roads without checking to see if it is true that there is no traffic hurtling towards them. Alternatively, how about, is this fluid truly water, or poison? Our continued existence and our communications depend on truth. Not only that but in what is one of the oldest paradoxes known to philosophy, truth cannot be denied without affirming it; is it true that there is no such thing as truth? So, can anyone seriously think that truth does not matter? 

The answer to that question came in a stunning exchange between Rudy Giuliani, President Trump’s lawyer, and NBC host Chuck Todd. The exchange began with Mr Todd asking Mr Giuliani whether the Trump team was stalling about a possible tes-timony at the inquiry led by Special Counsel Robert Mueller into alleged meddling by Russia in the 2 0 1 6 US election. Mr Giuliani replied: “I’m not going to be rushed into having him testify so he can be trapped into perjury… When you tell me that he should testify because he’s going to tell the truth and he shouldn’t worry, well that’s so silly because it’s somebody’s version of the truth. Not the truth.” 

When Todd countered that “truth is truth”, Mr Giuliani exclaimed: “Truth isn’t truth”. So Truth apparently isn’t truth (Morin and Cohen, 2 0 1 8 ). Giuliani’s comment on truth was met with outrage and scorn from all sides of the political spectrum, and left without further explanation, deservedly so. However, one day later Giuliani clarified his meaning. His explanation comes down to a version of “he said, she 

17New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

17 29 ▲

said”; a position that in the context of attempts to reduce the #metoo movement to just that, probably resonates with everyone (Murray, 2 0 1 8 ). On the surface, and ex-tending the principle of charity to Giuliani, his position makes some sense. But it also reveals how impoverished the debate around truth has become. What is miss-ing, and has been for some time, is both a view of truth as multi-dimensional and an acceptance of the concept of ‘objective truth’ that is not epistemological. Under the dead weight of identity politics, we now seem happy to take seriously claims that I can have my truth and you can have yours (Fukuyama, 2 0 1 8 ; see also Hyvö-nen, this volume). Standpoint epistemology and the concept of ‘lived experience’ both add to this view of truth as only ever something that is either subjective (my truth, your truth) or intersubjective (our truth), but never the truth (objective truth). 

However, without the concept of objective truth as a standard against which to hold subjective and intersubjective claims to be in possession of the truth, then all truth claims have to be taken at face value. For what grounds do we have to reject them? I cannot provide a complete answer in a piece such as this, but I do want to scope out the beginnings of a diagnosis. To that end, the piece first sets out a brief defence of objective truth, although what I mean by that will, I suspect, be very dif-ferent to how it is typically understood. Then, I will briefly examine the role of aca-demics in the post-truth era and suggest that while postmodernism is not to blame, it is not entirely off the hook either. Much of what follows is highly schematic, and word limits preclude me from a more nuanced discussion. Hence the polemic. 

KNOWLEDGE, REALITY AND OBJECTIVE TRUTH A classic distinction, dating back at least to Plato, is that between Doxa and Episteme. Doxa is an ancient Greek word meaning common belief or popular opinion. Plato used the concept of Doxa to criticise Athenian democracy, believing that common belief and popular opinion were easily manipulated. Plato, it seems, was an early theorist and critic of populism, an issue, of course, that has contemporary relevance with the post-truth era. Plato set Doxa against Episteme or knowledge. For Plato, Doxa and Episteme were in opposition and Doxa represented a threat to the purity of real knowledge. Aristotle took a different view and believed that Doxa was a nec-essary moment on the road to knowledge and coined the term Endoxa to denote re-ceived knowledge that has passed the test of time and been subject to a crucial critique through argument. The Greeks also used another term for knowledge, which refers to a particular personal kind of knowledge. This was Gnosis; knowledge based on personal experience. Again, this relates to standpoint epistemology, as well as the idea much abused in contemporary debates around ‘lived experience’. 

The difference between Doxa and Episteme is central to epistemology. What is the difference between believing something and knowing something? There is no easy answer to this, although philosophers have debated the issue for centuries. However, 

18 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

there is no doubt such a distinction is necessary, and we probably all make such dis-tinctions all of the time. Science can be understood to have formalised this distinc-tion and devised a set of procedures that allow the distinction, with varying degrees of confidence, to be quantified. Note, however, that science rarely if ever claims to know something with 1 0 0 % certainty. In this sense, science can be understood to be a process that specifies differing levels of uncertainty without ever reaching the position of certainty. Alternatively, as Sophie Lewis and Allie Gallant have put it, “In science, the only certainty is uncertainty” (Lewis and Gallant, 2 0 1 3 ). However, this level of uncertainty was based on Episteme, not Doxa. Or to put it another way, sci-ence has a set of robust procedures that allow it to differentiate belief (Doxa) from knowledge (Episteme). In the post-truth era, on the other hand, Doxa and Gnosis seem to have displaced Episteme, at least in the public domain, as the dominant form of knowledge. This idea of Doxa as the dominant set of beliefs has, of course, been raised by Pierre Bourdieu (Bourdieu, 1 97 7 ) and used to effective ends in prac-tice orientated IR (Monk, 2 0 1 8 ). But the role of any properly reflexive social science should, at a minimum, be to examine those dominant beliefs and subject them to scrutiny and critique in the hope of moving beyond Doxa to Episteme. Whether the contemporary social sciences can fulfil that role is another matter. 

Ironically, presumably what accounts for Doxa and Gnosis’ appeal among non-sci-entists is that while Episteme deals with varying degrees of uncertainty, both Doxa and Gnosis provide certainty. If someone believes something, it is not possible that he or she can doubt that that is their belief. So if you experience (Gnosis) something as a microaggression that offends you, it makes no sense to say you are not of-fended. What we can do is to say that that belief is wrong, or that the feeling of of-fence is misplaced if we take into account the context in which the microaggression is thought to have occurred. Both of these gestures point to something external to the Doxastic belief and the Gnostic experience. They both point to a reality beyond the belief and a reality beyond that which is experienced. 

I have tried to point out the necessity of this commitment to philosophical realism in a series of exchanges with David Campbell (Campbell, 1 999 ; Wight, 1 999a), Rox-anne Lynn Doty (Doty, 1 997 ; Wight, 1 999b), Friedrich Kratochwil (Kratochwil, 2 0 0 7 ; Wight, 2 0 0 7 a; Wight, 2 0 0 7 b), and Patrick Jackson (Jackson, 2 0 0 8 ; Wight, 2 0 0 8 ; Wight, 2 0 1 3 ). I am not going to go so far as say that I knew post-truth was coming, but I always thought it was possible. Being proved right gives me no feelings of pleas-ure. 

Of course, no one rejects the fact of a reality independent of human thought. Surely, all that is being argued is that reality can be described in multiple ways and those descriptions come to take on a reality of their own that then becomes the re-ality we encounter. So far, so acceptable, although I am not sure what is particularly radical about this position. It is true, but it is also trivial. Also, this does not mean the 

19New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS

independent reality moves out of the picture. The concept of an elephant may be a social construction replete with meaning and cultural significance that varies across time and place. However, it does not matter what a particular culture believes about an elephant if one is bearing down on you; it is probably best to get out of the way. Much the same is true of volcanoes. They can be described as forces of nature or the wrath of the Gods. However, if you are close to one when it erupts the result is the same. Reality does not care much for how we describe it. Getting the meaning of something completely wrong can have severe consequences for us. Getting our descriptions of the world right, or at least as right as possible, is, in most circum-stances, what we mean by truth. 

This points to something important about how the concept of reality is inextrica-bly linked to the concept of truth, and how confusion over the concept of objectiv-ity obscures this relationship. If we all accept the existence of a reality independent of thought, then what is truth and what is objectivity? Let us deal with objectivity first. There is much confusion about this and the uses of terms such as ‘objective reality’ and ‘objective truth’ only add to the lack of clarity on this issue. Many of these con-fusions arise from some vagueness about the concept of objectivity itself. Objectivity can be understood as a noun that describes a process where decisions and/or judgements are based, as much as possible, on facts and not personal beliefs or feel-ings. Being objective means attempting, as much as is possible, to maintain an un-biased stance in making judgements. Absolute objectivity may not be attainable in practice, but academics should aspire to it. Thus, for example, it would be wrong for me to award additional marks for a student essay just because I know that that student supports the same football team as I do, just as it would be wrong for me to mark down a student who supports a football team I dislike. 

These, of course, are easy examples, and it is often difficult to distinguish the fact that you agree with the political conclusions of an essay from the overall judgement you form of the essay. Nonetheless, I believe all academics do aspire to this kind of objectivity, difficult as it may be to achieve. However, ‘objective’ is often used to mean something that is beyond dispute; the objective facts, for example; something beyond any and all doubt. We should not confuse the two uses. We aspire towards objectivity, understood as the attempt to not allow our biases to influence our re-search and judgements, but we can rarely if ever say with absolute certainty that we are in possession of the ‘objective’ facts. 

However, the confusion between these two forms of objectivity and the rise of identity politics is in many respects one of the main drivers of post-truth. Identity politics is a plea for us to give up on any notion of objectivity in the sense of trying to remain unbiased. This is because identity politics privileges social location over facts. Identity politics demands that we see group loyalty as taking priority over facts. Loyalty under identity politics is to the group, not the facts. Indeed, pointing to facts 

20 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

that run counter to the identity of a group one belongs to, could lead to expulsion from the group. Moreover, this is particularly the case if the very concept of ‘objec-tive truth’ is denied. 

The problem is that the concept of objective truth is tough to defend if it is un-derstood solely as an epistemological category. Academics, quite rightly, refrain from claiming that they are in possession of objective truth. Indeed, few scientists would also claim to be in possession of it. Humans are fallible. No matter how convinced we are about the facts in front of us, there is always a chance we have something wrong. However, this concern about our fallibility should not lead us to reject the concept of objective truth. If we do reject it, we are left only with subjective truth (my truth) or intersubjective truth (our truth, or identity politics) as possible options. 

To get around this problem we need to recover an ontological concept of truth, a truth that resides in the way the world is (or was), not in what we claim about the world. For example, consider the case of Malaysian Airlines flight MH37 0 . The un-explained disappearance of this flight is probably the greatest aviation mystery of all time. We do not know what happened. There are many speculative theories but as yet no account of what happened. Nonetheless, something did happen. A suicidal pilot. A terrorist attack. Technical malfunction. Alien abduction. There is a truth about MH37 0 ; however, we do not know it yet. The commitment to ontological truth is what grounds the possibility of any and all truth claims being wrong. A commitment to objective truth is what makes error possible. This is a truth we strive to grasp, to bring into the realm of meaning, but such is the distance between it and our pro-nouncements that we can never say with absolute certainty that we are in posses-sion of it. Even if new evidence were to emerge about the disappearance of MH37 0 , such that we would be confident in a new explanation, there could still be parts of the truth puzzle we do not know. Hence, objective truth is objective, but our knowl-edge of it is always provisional, fallible, and approximate, never total. 

UNDERSTANDING POST-TRUTH Many of the commentaries on post-truth have attempted to locate the sources of it. Where does post-truth discourse come from, and who is responsible for producing it? There are some trends, processes and events that have contributed to the emer-gence of post-truth but concentrating attention on the production of misinformation or outright lies is nothing to do with the concept of post-truth. There is nothing new about politicians, elites, and the powerful telling lies, spinning, producing propa-ganda, dissembling, or bullshitting (Mearsheimer, 2 0 1 3 ). Machiavellianism became a common term of political discourse precisely because it embodies Machiavelli’s belief that all leaders might, at some point, need to lie (Machiavelli, 1 9 8 8 ). Lying is not a political aberration; it is part of the essence of politics itself. Political theorist Leo Strauss, developing a concept first outlined by Plato, coined the term the ‘noble 

21New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS

lie’ to refer to a lie or untruth knowingly propagated by an elite to maintain social har-mony or to advance an agenda (Strauss, 1 95 2 : 35). 

Questions about the agents of post-truth, and attempts to locate the sources of political bullshit, are not issues concerning post-truth, which is not to say that such questions are not interesting, because they are. They are just not grasping what is new and specific about post-truth. If we look for post-truth in the realm of the pro-duction of disinformation, we will not find it. There is nothing new here. This is why so many are sceptical that the concept of post-truth represents anything new at all. 

Not all haystacks contain needles. But if this is correct, then where is post-truth lo-cated, what is it and how did we get here? Post-truth resides not in the realm of pro-duction, but in the realm of reception. If lies, dissembling, spinning, propaganda and the production of bullshit have always been part and parcel of politics, then what has changed is how publics respond to them. The definition of post-truth makes this clear; post-truth refers to “circumstances in which objective facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief” (Oxford Dic-tionaries, 2 0 1 6 ). 

While this definition captures the essence of the problem, most academics, par-ticularly those working in the Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences (HASS), will im-mediately identify one glaring problem with it. This is the concept of ‘objective facts’ and, of course, the related concept of ‘objective truth’. One does not have to be a postmodernist to know that the concept of ‘objective facts’ isn’t objective at all. Any-one with an awareness of the work of Thomas Kuhn (Kuhn, 1 9 6 2 ), Michel Foucault (Foucault, 1 97 2 ; Foucault and Gordon, 1 9 8 0 ; Foucault et al., 1 997 ), or Ludwig Wittgenstein (Wittgenstein, 1 97 2 ; Wittgenstein, 1 97 4 ) will know that facts are al-ways contestable. If they were not, public debate on complex political issues would be easy. We could identify the objective facts and conduct politics on the basis of them. 

Facts are social constructions (Searle, 1 997 ; Hacking, 2 0 0 0 ). If there were no hu-mans, no human societies, and no human languages, there would be no facts. If, as seems likely, given our inability to tackle the great environmental issues of the day, humans were to become extinct, there would still be states of affairs and ways the world is, but no facts. However, facts are a particular kind of socially constructed entity, and there is a difference between social facts and natural facts (Searle, 1 997 ). Moreover, the fact that facts are social constructions does not entail that just any claim is a fact. Facts express a relationship between what we claim and the state of the world. Facts are those particular social constructions we use to describe states of affairs. We construct facts to convey information about the world. But this does not mean we can make up any facts we please. What makes something a fact is that it captures some features of the world to which it refers. The validity of our facts is dependent, in part, on their relationship to the world they describe. Something that 

22 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

fails to describe something accurately, or some state of affairs, is not a fact. Of course, we do not have to claim that our socially constructed facts always describe the world in its totality, or that our facts are accurate. Sometimes we get the facts wrong or select the wrong facts to support our arguments. Of course, there are al-ways other facts we could have highlighted. There might indeed be something like ‘alternative facts’. 

Alternative facts, isn’t that nothing but a Trumpian trope? The idea is not as far-fetched as some might think. Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions is one of the most influential and widely read academic texts on the history of sci-ence. Kuhn’s idea of paradigms has seeped into public debate. But Kuhn’s idea of scientific ‘progress’ occurring through a change in paradigm not only legitimates al-ternative facts; it depends on them (Kuhn, 1 9 6 2 ). Each paradigm, according to Kuhn, has its own facts. Facts in one paradigm will not even be recognised as facts by ad-herents of alternative paradigms. Facts, Kuhn argued, are always relative to the over-arching paradigm. As such, Trump and his supporters might legitimately claim to be simply occupying a different paradigm. One can derive a similar position from Fou-cault’s notion of regimes of truth (Foucault and Gordon, 1 9 8 0 ; Foucault et al., 1 997 ). Truth, according to Foucault, is relative to the regime in which it is embedded. And regimes of truth differ across time and place. Alternatively, one can approach this via Ludwig Wittgenstein’s notion of ‘language games’, where unless one understands the rules of the game, one is unable to take part (Wittgenstein, 1 97 2 ). Transposed into contemporary political debate, the left and right each have their paradigm, regime of truth, or language game. 

Even if we do not accept Kuhn’s notion of paradigms, Kellyanne Conway could have meant, as she later tried to claim, that the Trump administration simply had a different perspective on the status of the facts, and a differing view of what facts matter (Pengelly, 2 0 1 7 ). Again, most academics will recognise the validity of this idea. There are always multiple perspectives on complex issues. The facts, as we constantly remind our students, don’t directly speak for themselves. Which facts matter, and what to make of them, is always a matter of interpretation. Thus, post-truth finds intellectual legitimation in the necessary and critical approach to the con-struction of knowledge that is an essential element of academia. Academics necessarily, and rightly, take a sceptical attitude to all truth claims. We encourage stu-dents to express their opinion. We teach them that alternative views are to be val-ued. Nietzschean perspectivism is the default position, and we are loath to reach definitive conclusions particularly in ethical and political matters (Hales and Welshon, 2 0 0 0 ; Nietzsche, 1 91 8 ). 

However, Nietzschean perspectivism is often misunderstood, although to be fair Nietzsche was not wholly consistent on the matter (Hales and Welshon, 2 0 0 0 ). The dominant, some might say postmodern, understanding of Nietzsche’s perspectivism 

23New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS

tends to conclude that it leads to a denial of objectivity and rejects realism. I think this is incorrect. Realism is at the heart of Nietzschean perspectivism and leads to ob-jectivity. 

There is only a perspective seeing, only a perspective “knowing”; and the more affects we allow to speak about one thing, the more eyes, different eyes, we can use to observe one thing, the more complete will our “concept” of this thing, our “objectivity,” be (Nietzsche, 1 91 8 ). 

Here Nietzsche makes clear that the more eyes (perspectives) that we bring to bear on one ‘thing’, the more complete (objective) will our concept of this ‘thing’ be. The ‘thing’ is the object we are studying, and it is singular, not multiple, and adding perspectives brings objectivity, not incommensurability (Wight, 1 99 6 ). So although Nietzsche often appears as a staunch critic of the Enlightenment, it is clear that his account of perspectivism implies a commitment to realism and objective truth that the multiple perspectives are attempting to uncover. 

However, without this commitment to realism and objective truth, the idea of perspectivism can easily drift into a relativist morass, where each perspective has its truth rather than functioning as one perspective among many on the objective truth. Ironically, it is Immanuel Kant, whose commitment to the Enlightenment is often counterposed to that of Nietzsche, who opens up space for a subjectivist ac-count of truth. Kant’s call to arms in the service of the Enlightenment was “sapere aude” – dare to know (Kant, 1 7 8 4 ). This was a call for humanity to overthrow its re-liance on the Church, the Monarchy and other sources of authority as providing the secure grounds for knowledge claims. Take nothing at face value, and reason for oneself. Taken within the context of the time of its writing Kant’s advice seems sound. But our contemporary problem is not the articulation of space to reason for oneself against authoritarian sources of knowledge, but the kind of authoritarian-ism that comes from the rejection of the concept of objective truth. As Hannah Arendt puts it: 

The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the distinction between fact and fiction (i.e., the reality of experience) and the distinction between true and false (i.e., the standards of thought) no longer exists (Arendt, 1 9 6 7 : 4 7 4 ). 

When the concept of objective truth is abandoned, Kant’s plea to reason for one-self becomes the ground upon which ‘my truth’ and ‘our truth’ take hold. Alongside this individualised approach to knowledge, the Enlightenment also promoted the idea of inalienable human rights possessed by each and every individual, and re-

24 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

vived the ancient Greek idea of democracy: one person, one vote; everyone has their say on political matters (Cassirer, 2 0 0 9 ; Habermas, 1 9 8 7 ). In this context, it is possible to view post-truth discourse as the radicalisation of the Enlightenment. Specifically, in the realm of knowledge production, it is the democratisation of epis-temology. 

While democracy might be a political principle worth defending, there is a tension between it and the democratisation of epistemology. Democracy needs a popula-tion sufficiently well-educated to be able to sift through the arguments and reach in-formed judgements. This was the great hope of Enlightenment liberalism, particularly concerning the provision of education. Increased access to education would bring progress and peace. A highly educated populace would make democracy function better. Even though by any standards western populations are now better educated than in Kant’s time, we seem to be regressing rather than progressing in terms of democratic practice. This is the post-truth paradox. The more educated societies have become, the more dysfunctional democracy seems to be. The supposed pos-itive link between democracy, education and knowledge seems to be broken. 

ALMOST (NOT) BLAMING POSTMODERNISM How can we explain this paradox, and can we do anything to address it? Although many have been quick to blame postmodernism, in particular, for the emergence of post-truth, the problem is much more extensive than that (Detmer, 2 0 0 3 ). Post-modernism is only the most radical version of the idea that we should value, and allow a voice to, all opinions. The political impulse behind this is admirable. Few ac-ademics are so arrogant as to claim that they possess the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Allowing others, particularly marginalised others, to express ‘their truth’ is seen as progressive. 

Although many academics will not embrace the extremes of postmodernism, the ethos behind that approach is understandable to most in the Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences. This explains why what seems to many outside of the academy to be a lunatic fringe, has become so influential within the academy. Foucault, for ex-ample, is one of the most cited authors in HASS subjects. 

To be clear, I am not arguing that Trump and others in his administration have read the likes of Kuhn, Foucault and Wittgenstein. The problem is worse than that. It is a structural issue. Increased access to education has suffused these ideas throughout the social field. Few people who have attended universities in the HASS subjects in the last 3 0 years could have escaped exposure to these ideas. The in-cipient relativism that is the logical endpoint of these ideas is now deeply ingrained in western societies. 

Of course, academics are not the only source of post-truth. But in a significant way, they have contributed to it. When measuring our impact on society we only 

25New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS

have two options. Either we have some impact, or we do not. For some time now those working in HASS subjects have been concerned to demonstrate how their re-search and teaching matter in practical ways to society. As the supposed guardians of truth, knowledge and the commitment to science, universities cannot have it both ways. If academics make a difference and publics no longer seem to care about facts, truth and reason, then we cannot be absolved of all responsibility for this sit-uation. Indeed, if we do deny our responsibility, we as good as admit that we have little impact on society. 

If universities are the societal institutions whose function is to produce and pro-tect knowledge and truth, and if those same institutions are, at least in part, the source of post-truth, what can we academics do about it? We need to be braver. We need to situate these critical approaches to the production of knowledge in con-text. We need to go beyond merely introducing students to critique and explore with them the validity of arguments. We need to be prepared to say that some per-spectives are better than others and explain why. An embracing of multiple per-spectives should not lead us to conclude that all perspectives are equally valid. And if they are not all equally valid, we need sound epistemological reasons to choose one over the other. In short, we need to re-examine and reinvigorate the Enlighten-ment impulse. 

Second, we need to recover our commitment to objective truth. George Or-well has been much cited as a prescient figure in understanding post-truth. Or-well believed the following: “The very concept of objective truth is fading out of the world. Lies will pass into history.” (McIntyre, 2 0 1 8 ) Yet the concept of ‘objec-tive truth’ has not merely faded out of the world; it has been sent into exile. Few academics embrace the concept today. This well-founded scepticism towards ‘ob-jective truth’ comes from the confusion between an ontological belief in the exis-tence of objective truth, and an epistemological claim to know it. The two are not synonymous. We can retain our critical stance to epistemological claims about objective truth only by insisting on its status as something that exists but which no one possesses. 

As Orwell knew only too well, if the concept of objective truth is moved into the dustbin of history there can be no lies. And if there are no lies, there can be no jus-tice, no rights and no wrongs. The concept of ‘objective truth’ is what makes claims about social justice possible. The irony, of course, is that most academics will claim to be doing just this. After all, most academics will have no problem in declaring cli-mate change to be human-produced, that women remain disadvantaged in many areas of life, that poverty is real, and that racism is founded on false beliefs. 

The issue is not that we all make these universal truth claims; it is that in em-bracing epistemological positions that tend towards relativism, we have denied our-selves a secure ground on which to defend them, in which case, these truth claims 

26 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

appear as nothing other than opinions, perspectives, or expressions of the identity we most value. And if academics cannot ground their truth claims on something other than opinions, perspectives or identity, then how can we expect anyone else to do so? 

CONCLUSION Public discourse over contentious political issues seems to be spiralling ever deeper into a position where publics care less about the veracity of claims and more about whether they agree with them. Explaining why this is the case is beyond the scope of this piece. However, I suspect that declining levels of trust in the institutions of so-ciety are behind it. However, if there is no objective truth, then no one can be speak-ing truth to power, in which case, truth-seeking has been replaced by truth production. So while we are probably not in a post-truth age in the sense that truth does not exist, we are in an era where the concept of truth is used in ways that no longer align with what truth has traditionally been taken to mean. And in a situation where objective truth is no longer something we strive to achieve, and if we know all sides of the political spectrum are engaged in producing their own truth, then it makes perfect sense to align oneself with those truths one finds most amenable to one’s own value system. Alternatively, to put it another way, if levels of trust in pub-lic institutions have declined to the extent that it is now assumed everyone is lying (although note that if there is no truth, there are no lies) then accepting the narra-tive that fits best with one’s worldview makes perfect sense. 

But while this seems to be a valid epistemological strategy, it is an ontological dis-aster zone. Whether we agree to the concept of objective truth or not, the world has a mode of being that stubbornly refuses to bend to our will. If we no longer care about this mode of being, its ultimate revenge will be on our humanistic and an-thropomorphic arrogance. Perhaps, given our flights of fancy where we believe that we construct the world in our discourse, that is a revenge that will be wholly justi-fied. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 Arendt, Hannah (1 9 6 7 ), The Origins of Totalitarianism, London: Allen & Unwin. 

 Ball, James (2 0 1 7 ), Post-Truth:How Bullshit Conquered the World, London: Biteback Publishing. 

 Bourdieu, Pierre (1 97 7 ), Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 Campbell, David (1 999), ‘Contra Wight: The Errors of a Premature Writing’, Review of International 

Studies, 2 5 (2 ): 31 7 – 3 2 1 . 

 Cassirer, Ernst (2 0 0 9 ), The Philosophy of the Enlightenment, Princeton, N.J.; Woodstock: Princeton Uni-

versity Press. 

 D’Ancona, Matthew (2 0 1 7 ), Post Truth:The New War on Truth and How to Fight Back, London: Ebury 

Press. 

27New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS

 Davis, Evan (2 0 1 7 ), Post-Truth:Why We Have Reached Peak Bullshit and What We Can Do About It, 

London: Little, Brown. 

 Detmer, David (2 0 0 3 ), Challenging Postmodernism:Philosophy and the Politics of Truth, New York: Hu-

manity Books. 

 Doty, Roxanne Lynn (1 997 ), ‘Aporia: A Critical Exploration of the Agent-Structure Problematique in In-

ternational Relations Theory’, Eur. J. Int. Rel., 3 (3): 1 37 . 

 Foucault, Michel (1 97 2 ), The Archaeology of Knowledge, London: Tavistock Publications. 

 Foucault, Michel and C. Gordon (1 9 8 0 ), Power/Knowledge:Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 

1972/1977, Brighton: Harvester Press. 

 Foucault, Michel (1 997 ), The Politics of Truth, New York: Semiotext(e). 

 Fukuyama, Francis (2 0 1 8 ), Identity:The Demand for Dignity and the Politics of Resentment, New York: 

Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 

 Habermas, Jurgen (1 9 8 7 ), The Entwinement of Myth and Enlightenment:Horkheimer and Adorno, Cam-

bridge, MA: MIT Press. 

 Hacking, Ian (2 0 0 0 ), The Social Construction of What?, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

 Hales, Steven D. and Rex Welshon (2 0 0 0 ), Nietzsche’s Perspectivism, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. 

 Jackson, Patrick T. (2 0 0 8 ), ‘Back-to-Back Review: Pragmatic, Not Dogmatic, Ontology: A Reply to Colin 

Wight’, Cooperation and Conflict, 4 3 (3): 35 4 – 357 . 

 Kant, Immanuel (1 7 8 4 ), What Is Enlightenment. Available at http://www.columbia.edu/acis/ets/ 

CCREAD/etscc/kant.html. 

 Keyes, Ralph (2 0 0 4 ), The Post-Truth Era:Dishonesty and Deception in Contemporary Life, New York: 

St. Martin’s Press. 

 Kratochwil, Friedrich (2 0 0 7 ), ‘Of Communities, Gangs, Historicity and the Problem of Santa Claus: 

Replies to My Critics’, Journal of International Relations and Development, 1 0 (1 ): 57 – 7 8 . 

 Kuhn, Thomas S. (1 9 6 2 ), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: Chicago U.P. 

 Levitin, Daniel J. (2 0 1 6 ), Weaponized Lies:How to Think Critically in the Post-Truth Era, New York: Dutton. 

 Lewis, Sophie and Allie Gallant (2 0 1 3 ), ‘In Science, the Only Certainty Is Uncertainty’. Available at 

https://theconversation.com/in-science-the-only-certainty-is-uncertainty-1 7 1 8 0 . 

 Machiavelli, Niccoló (1 9 8 8 ), The Prince, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 McIntyre, Lee C. (2 0 1 8 ), Post-Truth, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

 Mearsheimer, John (2 0 1 3 ), Why Leaders Lie:The Truth About Lying in International Politics, Oxford: Ox-

ford University Press. 

 Monk, Daniel B. (2 0 1 8 ), ‘Towards a Doxology of War’, Critical Studies on Security, 6 (1 ): 8 – 1 4 . 

 Morin, Rebecca and David Cohen (2 0 1 8 ), ‘Giuliani: “Truth Isn’t Truth”’. Available at https://www.politico 

.com/story/2 0 1 8 /0 8 /1 9/giuliani-truth-todd-trump-7 8 8 1 6 1 . 

 Murray, S. (2 0 1 8 ), ‘Giuliani Walks Back “Truth Isn’t Truth” Comment’. Available at https://www.politico 

.com/story/2 0 1 8 /0 8 /2 0 /rudy-giuliani-truth-isnt-truth-7 8 8 9 2 2 . 

 Nietzsche, Friedrich W. (1 91 8 ), Genealogy of Morals, S.l.: Boni and Liveright, Inc. 

 Oxford Dictionaries (2 0 1 6 ), ‘Post-Truth’. Available at https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-

year/word-of-the-year-2 0 1 6 . 

28 New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

COLIN WIGHT

 Pengelly, Martin (2 0 1 7 ), ‘Kellyanne Conway: “Alternative Facts” Was My Oscars La La Land Blunder’, The 

Guardian, 0 3/0 3/2 0 1 7 . Available at https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2 0 1 7 /mar/0 3/kellyanne-

conway-alternative-facts-mistake-oscars (Accessed 2 1 /0 8 /2 0 1 8 ). 

 Searle, John (1 997 ), The Construction of Social Reality, New York: Free Press. 

 Strauss, Leo (1 95 2 ), Persecution and the Art of Writing, Chicago: Chicago University Press. 

 Wight, Colin (1 99 6 ), ‘Incommensurability and Cross-Paradigm Communication in International Rela-

tions Theory: “What’s the Frequency Kenneth?”’, Millennium. Journal of International Studies, 2 5(2 ): 2 91 – 

31 9 . 

 Wight, Colin (1 999a), ‘Metacampbell: The Epistemological Problematics of Perspectivism’, Review of In-

ternational Studies, 2 5 (2 ): 31 1 – 31 6 . 

 Wight, Colin (1 999b), ‘They Shoot Dead Horses Don’t They? Locating Agency in the Agent-Structure 

Problematique’, Eur. J. Int. Relat., 5(1 ): 1 0 9 . 

 Wight, Colin (2 0 0 7 a), ‘Inside the Epistemological Cave All Bets Are Off’, Journal of International Rela-

tions and Development, 1 0 (1 ): 4 0 – 5 6 . 

 Wight, Colin (2 0 0 7 b), ‘A Response to Friedrich Kratochwil: Why Shooting the Messenger Does Not 

Make the Bad News Go Away!’, Journal of International Relations and Development, 1 0 (3): 3 0 1 – 31 5 . 

 Wight, Colin (2 0 0 8 ), ‘Back-to-Back Review: Living with Hume’s Problem: Reply to Patrick Jackson’, Co-

operation and Conflict, 4 3 (3): 357 – 3 6 0 . 

 Wight, Colin (2 0 1 3 ), ‘The Dualistic Grounding of Monism: Science, Pluralism and Typological Trunca-

tion’, Millennium. Journal of International Studies, 4 1 (2 ): 3 2 6 – 3 4 5 . 

 Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1 97 2 ), Philosophical Investigations, Oxford: Blackwell. 

 Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1 97 4 ), On Certainty, Oxford: Blackwell. 

29New Perspectives Vol. 26, No. 3/2018 

POST-TRUTH, POSTMODERNISM AND ALTERNATIVE FACTS